Jguerra-hspec-golden-tutorial (#109)
stackbuilders/tutorials: tutorials/haskell/hspec-golden-test-tutorial/tutorial.md

---
title: Golden Testing with Hspec-golden
published: 2019-10-31
ghc: 8.0.2
lts: 14.10
tags: haskell, golden, tests
libraries: hspec-golden-0.1.0.1
language: haskell
author-name: Jorge Andrés Guerra Landázuri
twitter-profile: Jorge_257
github-profile: Jagl257

> description: Software testing is necessary to check if an application behaves in an expected way. Sometimes it is useful to store the expected output in a separate file. This is how golden tests works and in this tutorial we will be using the Hspec-golden haskell library to easily create and update our golden tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Software testing is necessary to check if an application behaves in an expected way. Sometimes it is useful to store the expected output in a separate file. This is how golden tests work and in this tutorial, we will be using the hspec-golden Haskell library to easily create and update our golden tests.
```

---

> The value of software testing relies on the ability to check if an application behaves properly. Unit tests are the first layer of testing and help developers detect bugs early in the code by testing each component individually.

Reviewer 2: @Jagl257 let's break long lines into multiple lines for easy comment/feedback. I think you use VIM so you can select the line and use `gq` to split them automatically 🚀

> The value of software testing relies on the ability to check if a determined application behaves in an appropriate way. Unit tests are the first level of testing and help developers detect early bugs in the code by testing each component individually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The value of software testing relies on the ability to check if an application behaves properly. Unit tests are the first layer(?) of testing and they help developers detect bugs early in the code by testing each component individually.
```

> The importance of software testing relies on the ability to check if a determined application behaves in an appropriate way. Unit tests are the first level of testing and helps developers to detect early bugs in the code by testing each component individually.

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 Since _Unit tests_ is plural. Shouldn't _helps_ be just _help_?

For example, let's create a function that welcomes someone to this tutorial:

```haskell
sayHi :: String -> String
sayHi name = "Welcome to the Golden Tests tutorial " ++ name
```

Using `hspec` we can easily test our function :

```haskell
import HelloWorld
import Test.Hspec

spec :: Spec
spec = do
    describe "sayHi" $ 
        it "shows a Hello Golden Testers string" $
            (sayHi "John Doe") `shouldBe` "Welcome to the Golden Tests tutorial John Doe"
```

> In a nutshell, we are comparing the output of the function with a string that is stored inside the code of our test. We can take a different approach and store this expected output in a separate file. This approach is known as golden testing and the file in which we store the expected output takes the name of "golden file".

Reviewer: `body of our test` instead of `code of our test`?

Author: Sounds much better. Thanks @dbalseiro .

> So, now we know what golden testing is, but if unit tests and golden tests are so similar, why don't we just keep up with unit tests? Right?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So, now we know what golden testing is, but if unit tests and golden tests are so similar, why don't we just keep up with unit tests, right?
```

> The truth is that unit tests are not useful when evaluating large, complex outputs and that's where the difference lies. Tests are all about maintainability and readability, and when we test large outputs we tend to add visual noise to our code. Golden Tests helpfully fix this issue. Let's check the main advantages:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The truth is that unit tests are not useful when evaluating large, complex outputs and that's where the difference lies. Tests are all about maintainability and readability, and when we test large outputs we tend to add visual noise to our code. Golden Tests helpfully fix this issue, and comes with these advantages:
```

> The truth is that unit tests are not useful when evaluating complex and large outputs and that's where the difference lies. Test are all about maintainability and readability and when we tests large outputs we tend to add visual noise to our code. Helpfully Golden Tests fixes this issue, lets check the main advantages.

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 _when we test_ (correct plural form of the verb) rather than _when we tests_.

 - Large outputs are stored in a golden file reducing the visual noise in our code.

>  - With some golden tests libraries the Golden Files can be automatically generated.

Reviewer: Why "Golden Files" is capitalized here and it's not in the previous paragraph?

>  - With some golden tests libraries the expected output (Golden File) can be automatically generated.

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 I'll suggest to rephrase this point with:
> Golden files can be automatically generated with the expected output.

>  - Some golden test libraries also automatically update the golden file. So we don't need to manually update the tests when the expected output changes. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - Some golden test libraries also automatically update the golden file. So they don't need to be updated manually when the expected output changes. 
````

Here you are referring to golden files, no need to use the action of us updating them :)

>  - Some golden test libraries also automatically updates the golden file. So, we don't need to manually update the tests when the expected output changes. 

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 I think it should be _update_ rather than _updates_. Am I right?

>  - It is useful when working with JSON, HTML, images, etc.

Reviewer: I think you can merge this line with the previous paragraph and change it to "This is useful when ..." WDYT?

> In this tutorial we will use [hspec-golden](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/hspec-golden) library to build golden tests. We will also use the `hspec-golden` CLI to easily update them.

Reviewer 2: Let's move all the links to the bottom of the file using reference links instead of inline links:

```
[hspec-golden][hspec-golden-link]

[hspec-golden-link]: http://hackage.haskell.org/package/hspec-golden
```

or if it makes sense the reference has the same name as the text this can be used like:

```
[hspec-golden][]

[hspec-golden]: http://hackage.haskell.org/package/hspec-golden
```

> You can either code along with this tutorial or check out the finished [code](https://github.com/stackbuilders/tutorials/tree/tutorials/tutorials/haskell/hspec-golden-test-tutorial/code) in Github. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can either code along with this tutorial or check out the completed [code](https://github.com/stackbuilders/tutorials/tree/tutorials/tutorials/haskell/hspec-golden-test-tutorial/code) in Github.
```

## Hspec-golden

> `Hspec-golden` is a StackBuilders testing library written in Haskell, that helps users implement golden tests. It is an open source project so feel free to [review](https://github.com/stackbuilders/hspec-golden) it.

Reviewer 2: This can be rephrased to something like this, WDYT?

```suggestion
The `hspec-golden` testing library is a StackBuilders open-source project written in Haskell, that helps users implement golden tests. You can find its code [here](https://github.com/stackbuilders/hspec-golden), and feel free to submit your suggestions or contributions.
```

## Getting Started

> 

Reviewer 2: Should this include what tooling is required? like `stack` and `ghc`?

> `Hspec-golden` is a StackBuilders testing library, written in haskell, that helps users implement golden tests. It is an OpenSource project so feel free to [review](https://github.com/stackbuilders/hspec-golden) it.

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 OpenSource are two separate words: _open source_

First things first, lets create a new Haskell project on which we will be working:

```bash

> stack new "hspec-golden-tests"

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 I think the name of the example project change to `hspec-golden-test-tutorial`. Could you please change it here?

```

> and add the necessary dependencies in order to follow this tutorial without issues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and add the following required dependencies to follow this tutorial without issues.
```

> Project dependencies

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 We can remove `Project dependencies` and add a colon at the end of the previous sentence:
> ...follow this tutorial without issues:

> Project dependencies

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 Let's add a colon at the end of this sentence (`:`)

``` yaml
dependencies:
- base >= 4.7 && < 5
- aeson
- text
- bytestring
- blaze-html
```

> Testing dependencies

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 Let's add a colon at the end of this sentence (`:`)

```yaml
dependencies:
- hspec-golden-tests
- hspec
- hspec-golden

```
## A Simple Test

Now that we have all of the dependencies installed, let's get started with the golden tests.

First let's create a `FizzBuzz ` module to be tested and add some code. For convenience, I have created it inside a `FIZZBUZZ` directory. 

```haskell
module FIZZBUZZ.FizzBuzz where 

fizzBuzz :: [Int] -> [String]
fizzBuzz list = map fizzOrBuzz list

fizzOrBuzz ::Int -> String
fizzOrBuzz n | n `mod` 15 == 0  = "FizzBuzz"
             | n `mod` 3  == 0  = "Fizz"
             | n `mod` 5  == 0  = "Buzz"
             | otherwise        = show n

```

> For simplicity we will test a simple function `fizzBuzz` that replaces multiples of 3 with Fizz and multiples of 5 with Buzz. In case that a number is a multiple of both it replaces the number with FizzBuzz. Before moving on with testing, let's review some of `hspec-golden` [documentation](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/hspec-golden-0.1.0.1/docs/Test-Hspec-Golden.html).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For simplicity, we will test a simple function `fizzBuzz` that replaces the multiples of 3 with "Fizz" and the multiples of 5 with "Buzz". In case that a number is a multiple of both, it replaces the number with "FizzBuzz". Before we continue with testing, let's review some of `hspec-golden` [documentation](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/hspec-golden-0.1.0.1/docs/Test-Hspec-Golden.html).
```

> For simplicity we will test a simple function `fizzbuzz` that replaces multiples of 3 with Fizz and multiples of 5 with Buzz. In case that a number is a multiple of both it replaces the number with FizzBuzz. Before moving on with testing, let's review some of `hspec-golden` [documentation](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/hspec-golden-0.1.0.1/docs/Test-Hspec-Golden.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For simplicity, we will test a simple function `fizzbuzz` that replaces multiples of 3 with "Fizz" and multiples of 5 with "Buzz". In case a number is a multiple of both it replaces the number with "FizzBuzz". Before moving on with testing, let's review some of `hspec-golden` [documentation](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/hspec-golden-0.1.0.1/docs/Test-Hspec-Golden.html).
```

> For simplicity we will test a simple function `fizzbuzz` that replaces 3 multiples with fizz and 5 multiples with buzz, in case a number is multiple of both it replaces the number with fizzbuzz. But before moving on with testing, lets review some of ```hspec-golden``` [documentation](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/hspec-golden-0.1.0.1/docs/Test-Hspec-Golden.html).

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 Shouldn't it be _multiples of 3_ and _multiples of 5_? Also, Could you please capitalize `buzz`, `fizz` and `fizzbuzz`? (e.g. `Buzz`)

Author: Yes, indeed. Thank's @CristhianMotoche

> Hspec-golden provides us with a `defaultGolden` function which creates the golden files and compares it with the Subject Under Test (SUT) output. It takes two parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hspec-golden provides a `defaultGolden` function which creates the golden files and compares them with the Subject Under Test (SUT) output. It takes two parameters:
```

Ok enough reading, lets create our tests. Let's first create a test module named ```FizzBuzzGoldenSpec``` under `test/FizzBuzz/` directory.

```Haskell
module FizzBuzz.FizzBuzzGoldenSpec where
```

We need some imports.

```Haskell
import           Test.Hspec                   --Tests
import           Test.Hspec.Golden            --Golden Tests
import           FIZZBUZ.FizzBuzz             -- SUT
```
Finally lets write the test.

```Haskell
spec :: Spec
spec = 
    describe "fizzBuzz" $
      it "Turns 3 multiples to fizz and 5 multiples to buzz" $
        defaultGolden "fizzbuzz" (show $ fizzBuzz [1,2,3,4,5,11,12,13,14,15])
```
We are now ready to test our module.

```shell
$ stack test

hspec-golden-tests> test (suite: hspec-golden-tests-test)

FizzBuzz.FizzBuzzGolden
  fizzBuzz
    Turns 3 multiples to fizz and 5 multiples to buzz
      First time execution. Golden file created.

Hello.Hello
  sayHi
    shows a Hello Golden Testers string

Finished in 0.0006 seconds
2 examples, 0 failures

hspec-golden-tests> Test suite hspec-golden-tests-test passed
```

> The test is successful. If we check the "./golden" directory we will find two files.

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 I think the correct path is just `.golden`

 - golden : Stores the expected output.
 - actual : Stores the real output from the SUT.

```shell
$ tree
.golden
 └── fizzbuzz
     ├── actual
     └── golden
```

> The testing framework recognized that this was the first execution, therefore created the fizzbuzz test with the `actual` and `golden` files. The difference between these two files is that the `golden` file will stay the same unless we want to update it while the `actual` file will be overwritten every time we run the test. This is useful when updating the tests, but we will see that later on in this tutorial. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The testing framework recognized that this was the first execution, therefore it created the fizzbuzz test with the `actual` and `golden` files. The difference between these two files is that the `golden` file will stay the same unless we want to update it while the `actual` file will be overwritten every time we run the test. This is useful when updating the tests, but we will see that later in this tutorial. 
```

Reviewer: If you say "the `golden` file will stay the same while the `actual` file will be overwritten every time we run the test" I understand that perfectly. But when you add more information, like "unless we want to update it", in the middle of the sentence, it kinda lost me. Maybe you can add that piece of information in a different sentence?

> The testing framework recognized that this was the first execution, therefore created the fizzbuzz test with the ```actual``` and ```golden``` files. The difference between this two files is that the ```golden``` will stay the same unless we want to update it while the ```actual``` file will be overwritten everytime we run the test. This is useful when updating the tests, but we will see that further in this tutorial. 

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 I'd suggest to use only one backtick for inline code (e.g. \`code\`) and multiple backticks for code blocks.

## A More Real Test Case

> The `fizzbuzz` module was used to create a simple and didactic example but it could have been easily tested with unit tests. In practice golden tests are often used when testing JSON, HTML or images which generate large outputs. We also haven't yet tested the entire functionality of the `hspec-golden` library yet. For example the `hgold` CLI for updating the golden files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `fizzbuzz` module was used to create a simple and didactic example but it could have been easily tested with unit tests. In practice, golden tests are often used when testing JSON, HTML or images which generate large outputs. We also haven't yet tested the entire functionality of the `hspec-golden` library. For example, the `hgold` CLI for updating the golden files.
```

> The `fizzbuzz` module was used to create a simple and didactic example but it could have been easily tested with unit tests. In practice golden tests are often used when testing JSON, HTML or images which generate large outputs. We also haven't yet tested the entire functionality of the `hspec-golden` library yet. For example the `hgold` CLI for updating the golden files.

Reviewer: Try to avoid passive voice like "was used to create" or "is often used" whenever possible. I think it's better to use "we used whatever to create whatever" or "We used this thing to do that thing"

> The `fizzbuzz` module was used to create a simple and didactic example but it could have been easily tested with unit tests. In the practice golden tests are often used when testing JSON, HTML or images which generate large outputs. We haven't also tested the whole functionality of `hspec-golden` library yet. For example the `hgold` CLI for updating the golden files.

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 I'd rephrase the last sentence to:

> For example, `hgold` CLI for updating the golden files automatically.

> Let's create some new modules to demonstrate a real case in which golden tests are needed.

Reviewer: Passive voice. Maybe rephrase a little bit like "... a real case where we can put golden test to good use"

> Lets create some new modules to demostrate a real case in which golden tests are needed.

Reviewer 3: :+1:

    H.head $ do
        H.title "StackBuilders Tutorial."
    body $ do
       "Hello Golden Testers."
```

###### Json.hs

```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE DeriveGeneric #-}

module JSON.Json where

import            Data.Aeson                   (ToJSON, encode)
import            GHC.Generics                 (Generic)
import            Data.ByteString.Lazy         (ByteString)

data Country = Country
  {
    cname      :: String,
    continent :: String,
    ctag       :: Int
  } deriving (Generic, Show)

instance ToJSON Country

ecuador = Country "Ecuador" "America" 1
germany = Country "Germany" "Europe" 2
japan = Country "Japan" "Asia" 3

countries :: [Country]
countries = [ecuador,germany,japan]

encodeCountries :: [Country] -> ByteString
encodeCountries = encode
```

Before coding our tests, lets create and organize `HtmlGoldenSpec.hs` and `JsonGoldenSpec.hs` modules into directories as well.

```shell
$ tree tests
test
├── FizzBuzz
│   └── FizzBuzzGoldenSpec.hs
├── Hello
│   ├── HelloGoldenSpec.hs
│   └── HelloSpec.hs
├── Html
│   └── HtmlGoldenSpec.hs
├── Json
│   └── JsonGoldenSpec.hs
└── Spec.hs
```
We are now ready to start coding our golden tests.

#### HTML Golden tests

> Lets start with the HTML module importing all the things we need

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 We probably want to add a colon (`:`) that introduces the following lines.

Author: @CristhianMotoche the colon (:) is used for enumerations only and in this case I'm just showing a code block. Anyway I think a dot should work.

```haskell
import           Test.Hspec
import           Test.Hspec.Golden
import           HTML.Html
```

> and writting our test.

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 What about adding a colon (`:`) that introduces the following lines?

```haskell
spec :: Spec
spec =
    describe "renderHtml" $
      it "Renders an Html5 file " $
       defaultGolden "html" (htmlRendered somePage)
```

Just like the previous example, after running the test we will have a new directory `.golden/html/` that contains our actual and golden file. But what happens if we would have to change our HTML template?

> In practice changes may include several lines and tags but to make a simple example, let's edit the body of our HTML to "Goodbye Golden Testers" and run the tests.    

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In practice, changes may include several lines and tags but to make a simple example, let's edit the body of our HTML to "Goodbye Golden Testers" and run the tests.    
```

```shell
test/Html/HtmlGoldenSpec.hs:11:5:
  1) Html.HtmlGolden.renderHtml Renders an Html5 file
      expected: "   
       <body>
               Hello Golden Testers.
       </body>"
      but got: "
       <body>
               Goodbye Golden Testers.
       </body>"

Finished in 0.0013 seconds
3 examples, 1 failure
```

Our HTML test failed, but not big deal, we can edit our `golden` file and things will work just fine. Pretty simple right?

> Actually its not, let{s remeber this is just a didactic example, in the real life golden files stores really large outputs and it would be a waste of time to update them by hand. Fortunately `hspec-golden` provides us with `hgold` CLI tool that automatically updates golden files using. Let's install it.

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 _let's_ (apostrophe) and _remember_ (m before b)

Author: @CristhianMotoche yes I reviewed the hole document and chaged the lets to let's. Thanks Cris.

Using stack:

```shell
$stack install hspec-golden
```

using Cabal:

```shell
$cabal install hspec-golden
```

> Once installed we can use the --help flag to see how the CLI works.

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 Let's enclose `--help` with single backticks.

According to [hspec-golden](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/hspec-golden), when `hgold` is used without flags it updates by default the `/.golden` directory. If we store our golden files in a different directory we should use the `--update` flag and specify the name of the directory as an argument.

> Ok, lets update our golden files. 

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 _let's_ (apostrophe)

```shell
$ hgold
Replacing golden with actual...
  Replacing file: .golden/hello/golden with: .golden/hello/actual
  Replacing file: .golden/html/golden with: .golden/html/actual
Finish...
```

> Hgold replaces the `golden` file (Expected output) with the content of the `actual` file (SUT Output) so it is necessary to run the test first (even if they fail) to update our tests.

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 We don't need to capitalize _Expected_ or _Output_. Also, could you please tell me what:

> so it is necessary to run the test first (even if they fail) to update our tests.

means?

Author: @CristhianMotoche it explains that in order to update the test we should first execute the test with the wrong output. This is necessary because the actual file must be overwritten before the golden file is updated. For example, if we make a change in the code and just updates the test before running, no golden file will be actually updated.

Hgold replaces the `golden` file (expected output) with the content of the `actual` file (SUT output) so it is necessary to run the test first (even if they fail) to update our tests.

So now we are ready to test our updated golden files.

```shell 
Hello.HelloGolden
  sayHi
    returns Hello Golden Testers string
      Golden and Actual output hasn't changed
Hello.Hello
  sayHi
    shows a Hello Golden Testers string
Html.HtmlGolden
  renderHtml
    Renders an Html5 file 
      Golden and Actual output hasn't changed

Finished in 0.0034 seconds
3 examples, 0 failures
```

And we can see, everything works fine.

#### JSON Golden Test

> Until now, we have managed components that return only strings, but what if our return type is different like a `ByteString` or `Text`? For example, let's analyze the `encodeCountries` function in the `Json.hs` module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So far, we have managed components that return only strings. But what if our return type is different like a `ByteString` or `Text`? For example, let's analyze the `encodeCountries` function in the `Json.hs` module.
```

> Until now we have managed components that returns strings only, but what if our return type is different like a ByteString or Text? For example, lets analize the `encodeCountries` function in the `Json.hs` module.

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 Let's enclose `ByteString` and `Text` with backticks.

Author: Ok @CristhianMotoche , done.

```haskell
encodeCountries :: [Country] -> ByteString
encodeCountries = encode
```

This function returns a ByteString. That means that if we try to assert the output with our `defaultGolden` function,

```haskell
  describe "encodeCountries" $ do
   it "encodes a group of Countries into a JSON String " $
    defaultGolden "json" (encodeCountries countries)
```

tests won't even compile.

```shell
$stack test
• Couldn't match type ‘B.ByteString’ with ‘[Char]’
      Expected type: String
        Actual type: B.ByteString
```

> Conveniently, `hspec-golden` exports a `Golden` data type. With this tool we can configure our Golden test by specifying the functions `hspec-golden` should use for our test to work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conveniently, `hspec-golden` exports a `Golden` data type. With this tool, we can configure our Golden test by specifying the functions `hspec-golden` should use for our test to work.
```

> ```

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 I think you need to specify the type of this code (e.g. haskell).

Author: @CristhianMotoche yes it's a haskell type. Thank's

data Golden str =
  Golden {
    output       :: str,                      --  Output
    encodePretty :: str -> String,            --  Makes the comparison pretty when the test fails
    writeToFile  :: FilePath -> str -> IO (), --  How to write into the golden file the file
    readFromFile :: FilePath -> IO str,       --  How to read the file,
    testName     :: String,                   --  Test name 
    directory    :: FilePath                  --  Directory where you write your tests
  }
```

> For example we can define a different directory for storing our golden files or we can define how our test will be read and how the output should be written. Also the `encodePretty` characteristic determines how the prompt should print a readable output when tests fails. With this data-type we are now able to create a new function to assert our output. Let's start by importing some modules.

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 _tests_ is plural. Is correct to conjugate _fails_? I think we can write _... output when a tests fail_.

> For example, we can define a different directory for storing our golden files or we can define how our test will be read and how the output should be written. Also, the `encodePretty` characteristic determines how the prompt should print a readable output when tests fail. With this data-type we are now able to create a new function to assert our output. Let's start by importing some modules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, we can define a different directory for storing our golden files or how our test will be read and how the output should be written. Also, the `encodePretty` characteristic determines how the prompt should print a readable output when tests fail. With this data type, we are now able to create a new function to assert our output. Let's start by importing some modules.
```

> ``` Haskell

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 I'm not sure if this code block is correctly formatted. Could you please double check that? I think the correct block code should be: \`\`\`haskell  \`\`\`

Author: @CristhianMotoche yes it is ```haskell```, thanks.

module Json.JsonGoldenSpec where

import           Test.Hspec
import           Test.Hspec.Golden
import           JSON.Json
import qualified Data.ByteString.Lazy as B    
```

> Next, based on the `Golden` data type documentation , lets create our assert function.

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 _let's_ (apostrophe).

> ```Haskell

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 Same here.

goldenBytestring :: String -> B.ByteString -> Golden B.ByteString
goldenBytestring name actualOutput =
    Golden {
        output = actualOutput,
        encodePretty = show,
        writeToFile = B.writeFile,
        readFromFile = B.readFile,
        testName = name,
        directory = ".otherGolden"
          
    }
```

> Let's analyze a little our `goldenBytestring` function: 

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 I think we can rephrase this to:
>  Let's analyze our `goldenBytestring` function a little bit:

>  - It return type is a `Golden ByteString`.

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 _Its type is `Golden ByteString`_ (?)

Author: @CristhianMotoche sounds much better, thanks.

 - To print our failed tests it makes use of haskell's `show` function. 
 - To write the bytestring into a file as well as reading it from a file we have used the `writeFile` and `readFile` functions from the Data.ByteString.Lazy module.

>  - We will be saving the output into a different directory called `/.otherGolden`. 

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 I'm not sure about this path:  `/.otherGolden`. As you know, this `/` is the root directory, so  `/.otherGolden` can be misunderstood with `.otherGolden` inside the root (`/`) directory. I think  `.otherGolden/` should work. What do you think?

Author: @CristhianMotoche , yes that is right. Alredy changed.

> 

Reviewer: I think it would be clearer if you order the sentences the other way around. For instance "It uses the `show` function to print out failed tests"

```shell
$ tree 
├── .golden
│   ├── hello
│   │   ├── actual
│   │   └── golden
│   └── html
│       ├── actual
│       └── golden
|
└── .otherGolden
```

We are now ready to create our test.

```Haskell
spec :: Spec
spec =

  describe "encodeCountries" $ do
   it "encodes a group of Countries into a JSON bytestring " $
    goldenBytestring "json" (encodeCountries countries)
```

> And run them to see if our assert function is working fine.

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 It's just one test, so let's change `them` with `it`. Sounds good?

```shell
  encodeCountries
    encodes a group of Countries into a JSON bytestring 
      First time execution. Golden file created.

Finished in 0.0034 seconds
4 examples, 0 failures
```

Everything works fine.

> Let's remember that our golden files are stored in a different directory. So in the case that we make an update we should use the `hgold` CLI with the `--update` flag, followed by the name of our golden tests directory; in this case `.otherGolden/`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's remember that we stored our golden files in a different directory. So in the case that we make an update, we should use the `hgold` CLI with the `--update` flag followed by the name of our golden tests directory, in this case, `.otherGolden/`.
```

---
title: Creating and Updating Golden Test with Hspec-golden
published: 2019-10-31
ghc: 8.0.2
lts: 14.10
tags: haskell, golden, tests
libraries: hspec-golden-0.1.0.1
language: haskell
author-name: Jorge Andrés Guerra Landázuri
twitter-profile: Jorge_257
github-profile: Jagl257

> description: Software testing is necessary to check if an application behaves in a expected way. Sometimes it is useful to store the expected output in a separate file. This is how golden tests works and in this tutorial we will be using Hspec-golden haskell library to create and update with no problem our golden tests.

Reviewer 3: :+1:

---

The importance of software testing relies on the ability to check if a determined application behaves in an appropriate way. Unit tests are the first level of testing and helps developers to detect early bugs in the code by testing each component individually.

For example, lets create a function that outputs the string "Hello Golden Testers":
```haskell
sayHi :: String

> sayHi = "Hello Golden Testers"

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257  I think an example with a little bit more of logic would be more helpful to explain this point. For example:
```hs
fizzBuzz :: [Int] -> [String]
fizzBuzz = ...
```

Then the unit and golden tests will look like:

```hs
spec :: Spec
spec = do
    describe "sayHi" $
        it "shows a Hello Golden Testers string" $
            fizzBuzz [1,2,3,5,15] `shouldBe` ["1", "2", "Fizz", "Buzz", "FizzBuzz"]

spec :: Spec
spec = do
    describe "sayHi" $
        it "shows a Hello Golden Testers string" $
            defaultGolden 'fizzBuzz' (show $ fizzBuzz [1,2,3,5,15])
{- Will store the file:
# .golden/fizzBuzz/golden
" [\"1\", \"2\", \"Fizz\", \"Buzz\", \"FizzBuzz\"]"
-}
```

Reviewer 3: What do you think?

Author: That test is just helpful to make an Intro. But I think this example could be used in the very first golden test sample. What do you think?

Reviewer 3: Sounds good @Jagl257 :+1:

Author: Its done @CristhianMotoche, To do this i had to chage some things in the tutorial as well.

```

Using Hspec we can easily test our function :

```haskell
import HelloWorld
import Test.Hspec

spec :: Spec
spec = do
    describe "sayHi" $
        it "shows a Hello Golden Testers string" $
            sayHi `shouldBe` "Hello Golden Testers"
```

So, in a nutshell we are comparing the output of the function with a string that is stored inside the code of our test. We can take a different approach and store this expected output in a separate file. This approach is known as golden testing and the file in which we store the expected output takes the name of "golden file".

> So, now we know what golden testing is, but if unit tests and golden tests are so similar, why don't we just keep up with unit tests right?

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 Let's add a comma before the `right?` question.
> ... keep up with unit tests, right?

Author: Done.

The truth is that unit tests are not useful when evaluating complex and large outputs and that's where the difference lies. Here are some advantages of golden tests over unit tests.

 - It wouldn't be practical to store a large output inside the test code.

>  - With some golden tests libraries the expected output (Golden File) can be automatically generated .

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 There is an extra space before the dot `(.)`.

Author: Thanks, done.

>  - Some golden test libraries also automatically updates the golden file.

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 I think we can add:
> Some golden test libraries also automatically updates the golden file. So, we don't need to manually update the tests when the expected output changes.

Author: Yes, sounds better. Done.

## Hspec-golden

Hspec-golden is a stackbuilders testing module written in haskell that helps users implement golden test. It is an OpenSource project so feel free to [review](https://github.com/stackbuilders/hspec-golden) it.

## Getting Started

First things first, lets create a new Haskell project on which we will be working:

```bash
stack new "hspec-golden-tests"
```

and add the necessary dependencies in order to follow this tutorial without issues.

Project dependencies

``` yaml
dependencies:
- base >= 4.7 && < 5
- aeson
- text
- bytestring
- blaze-html
```

Testing dependencies

``` yaml

dependencies:
- hspec-golden-tests
- hspec
- hspec-golden

```
## A Simple Test

Now that we have all dependencies installed, lets create our golden tests.

First lets create a ```HelloWorld ``` module to be tested and add the "Hello Golden Testers" function described earlier.

```haskell
module HelloWorld where

sayHi :: String
sayHi = "Hello Golden Testers"

```

> Before moving on with testing,lets review some of hspec-golden [documentation](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/hspec-golden-0.1.0.1/docs/Test-Hspec-Golden.html).

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 Let's add a space after the comma `... with testing, lets...`

Author: Done.

> Hspec-golden provides us with a defaultGolden function which creates and compares the SUT output and the golden file. It takes two parameters:

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 This is the first time that we mention SUT. Could you please write the name and then in parenthesis the abbreviation? `Subject Under Test (SUT)`

Author: Ok, done.

  - the name of the test (Directory where our golden file will be located)
  - the output of our SUT 

```haskell

defaultGolden :: String -> String -> Golden String

```

By default this function search for golden tests inside a "/.golden" directory, so it would be a great idea if we create one right now.

```shell 

.
├── .golden
├── app
├── src
└── test

```

Ok enough reading, lets create our tests. We will first create a test module named ```HelloGoldenSpec``` . For convenience I have created this module under test/Hello directory.

```Haskell

module Hello.HelloGoldenSpec where

```

We need some imports.

```Haskell

import           Test.Hspec              -- Test
import           Test.Hspec.Golden       -- Golden Tests  
import           HelloWorld              -- SUT

```
Finally lets write the test.

```Haskell

spec :: Spec
spec =
    describe "sayHi" $
    it "returns Hello Golden Testers string" $

>     defaultGolden "hello" sayHi

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 Let's indent the examples, too.

Author: Ok Cris, done.

    defaultGolden "json" (encodeCountries countries)

```

test wont even compile.

```shell
• Couldn't match type ‘B.ByteString’ with ‘[Char]’
      Expected type: String
        Actual type: B.ByteString
```

Conviniently hspec-golden export a Golden data type. With this tool we can configure our Golden test, 
specifying the right functions for our test to work.

```
data Golden str =
  Golden {
    output       :: str,                      --  Output
    encodePretty :: str -> String,            --  Makes the comparison pretty when the test fails
    writeToFile  :: FilePath -> str -> IO (), --  How to write into the golden file the file
    readFromFile :: FilePath -> IO str,       --  How to read the file,
    testName     :: String,                   --  Test name 
    directory    :: FilePath                  --  Directory where you write your tests
  }

```
For example here we can define a different directory for storing our golden files, also we can define how our test will be read and how the output will be written. Finally the ```encodePretty``` characteristic determines how a non-string type will be transformed to string.

> With dataa-type we are now able to create a new function to assert our output. Lets start by importing some modules.

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 Typo `s/dataa-type/data-type`?

Author: Thanks, done.

In this tutorial we will use [hspec-golden](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/hspec-golden) library to build some golden-test. We will also use the hspec-golden CLI to easily update our tests.

You can either code along with this tutorial or better undestand it by looking at the finished code. You can find this [code](https://github.com/stackbuilders/tutorials/tree/jguerra-hspec-tutorial) in Github. Feel free to use it.

## Hspec-golden

Hspec-golden is a stackbuilders testing module written in haskell that helps users implement golden test. It is an OpenSource project so feel free to [review](https://github.com/stackbuilders/hspec-golden) it.

## Getting Started

First things first, lets create a new Haskell project on which we will be working:

```bash
stack new "hspec-golden-tests"
```

and add the necessary dependencies in order to follow this tutorial without issues.

Project dependencies

``` yaml
dependencies:
- base >= 4.7 && < 5
- aeson
- text
- bytestring
- blaze-html
```

Testing dependencies

``` yaml

dependencies:
- hspec-golden-tests
- hspec
- hspec-golden

```
## A Simple Test

Now that we have all dependencies installed, lets create our golden tests.

> First lets create a ```FizBuz ``` module to be tested. For convinience I have created a FIZBUZ directory. Now let's add some code to our module. 

Reviewer 3: @Jagl257 I think the correct name is `FizzBuzz` (with double `zz`).

Author: @CristhianMotoche yes, alredy corrected.
